my name is Jessica Lynne and I'm a
writer and a critic coming all the way
from the planet of Brooklyn
I also co-founded arts at black which is
a journal of art criticism from black
perspectives that I'll be talking a
little bit more about but I have to
admit that when I was first invited I
struggled to figure out how my work was
aligned with the themes of the
conference's this year and to be certain
in very honest I am NOT a technologist
nor do I consider myself an artist but
as a critic I thought that what I might
be able to offer in the simplest of
terms is a short overview of what's
happening in the digital publishing
landscape specifically using a few
us-based
examples of new journals and
publications critics are often thought
of as authoritative Outsiders lurking
around artists ready to kind of strike
with opinions or hierarchical statements
about what's working and what's not
working what I'd like to offer today is
a consideration of the position of the
critic as a type of intimate looker
writing alongside an artist rather than
about an artist from this kind of aerial
top-down position and as media and
publishing landscapes have undergone
their own changes the digital space has
really allowed a new generation of
writers a chance to contribute to this
discourse so I'm hoping that today's my
short presentation today will give a
fair aerial sense of what's happening
right now what is offered so I think
that there arguably many definitions of
art criticism and for the purposes of
this conversation I'd like to use the
following as my working definition our
criticism provides a tool through which
we the public might think critically and
perhaps collectively about cultural
production and acknowledging the kind of
multiplicity of definitions that are
roaming around here I think that this
working definition aims to make space
for generous and generative
relationships of reciprocity between
artists public's writers and
Lucian's so what is changing if you are
kind of in tune with these conversations
and you've probably heard something of
the following everybody's an art critic
the Internet has killed criticism none
of it matters anymore
we're all waiting and a host of subpar
thoughts and opinions from unschooled
unskilled unlearning folks even and I
guess my pushback to that would be that
I think that there's always been subpar
opinions floating around us and I take
issue with the idea that the Internet
has killed criticism because for me it
becomes a coded complaint often talking
about the ways in which criticism is
opening up outside of a moral legacy
establishment and so I think that in a
period where we realize that newspapers
and magazines are cutting beats ad
revenue is disappearing if you're a
young writer of any discipline right and
certainly as an arts writer or
journalist what other alternatives
exists for you and for many of us the
net and the web has become that
alternative site so I want to now kind
of introduce you to two publications
with whom I have been in conversation
through art set but and then I'll kind
of dive further into my own work first
up we have a contemporary who one of the
others is actually having a conversation
today at the lattice Institute tonight
if you're interested but I want to bring
bring them up and call attention to the
work of Nazarene hamada he's on cam and
gallery
Koscheck azorín I first learned at the
contemporary in 2016 after the
publication won a Warhol Foundation
grant for arts writing and I think that
this project is really fascinating for
two reasons
that they identify themselves where they
think about art criticism and the
contempt as the commitment to clear the
horizon for necessary ruptures and more
being even beyond that rather they're
thinking about what happens after the
ruptures and how new communities and new
horizons are built from that
mess secondly I like to draw your
attention to temporary art review a st.
Louis based in part of the luminary
which is a non-profit art organization
there found it by Sarita Hahn and James
McConnell II temporary art review
emphasizes the breadth of projects
taking place outside traditional art
centers the site uses an experimental
anti profit model driven by a bartering
system that takes credit as a common
currency to distribute value
cooperatively amongst its contributors
and readers and then I'd be remiss
though not exclusively in art
publications to highlight the new
inquiry which has come up in several
ways here already as an organization
that's thinking explicitly about calling
and culling and new voices and then
further articulating a political stance
with deep Baylock as a perfect example
of that and I wanted to draw attention
to contemporary and temporary art review
because what is happening alongside art
satlok is a kind of explicit coalition
that's forming of web-based journals who
want to make a commitment and a stance
about publishing and then digital
landscape and so for our part we have
started alongside a few other journals
Pelican bomb in New Orleans the chart
important that may to draft a manifesto
to be clear and direct and intentional
about what we mean when we say we are
publishers who think about artists and
the arts that they are producing so last
November in Los Angeles at the common
folk conference we kind of gathered
together to invite the public into that
conversation and are in the hopefully
soon-to-be published stages of making
that manifesto public so that other
folks can kind of contribute weigh in
and give feedback to us a group of
writers and editors who want to be quite
clear that we are bringing in a
subjective point of view and also in
most instances a political kind of
commitment with the work that we're
doing how might we understand sites of
critique as interventions so it's in
line with my previous example
is the mission of my own journal arts
table and I think this question is quite
central when we think more broadly about
the role of writers and so many types of
justice and resistance movements
projects and writers who are not afraid
to take up the suggestive and as I
mentioned radical sets of political
beliefs and in doing so I'm positioning
intimacy as a concept that it can become
embedded in the test of criticism for
widening and making available multiple
canons multiple Canada's within our
history especially that offer and
introduced thinkers who not do not fit
within the categories of straight or
white or male or able-body or so on and
so forth you could insert a host of
identity verticals and marginalized
positions in there so what is alright
fat black I co-founded this really
important project in Journal four years
ago with my dear friend and colleague
Taylor Renee Aldridge we were both young
women of color specifically trying to
think about what was at stake for us in
the field and who we would serve through
our work one of the important questions
we kept asking is why it felt like
criticism always got to kind of operate
outside of conversations of equity when
conversations of equity and the arts
came up it was like the critics were
these invisible beings and what we
really wanted to argue is that no in
order to have a full-fledged
conversation about what's working was
not working in an arts and culture
infrastructure you have to implicate the
critic in that and so we began to kind
of ask these questions specifically
where are all the young black art
critics and it became both a rhetorical
device and a way of meeting people in
that we knew where the young black art
critics were they were on the web they
were on tumblr they were creating all
sorts of kind of interesting blogs and
communities online they just weren't
being published by mainstream
publications and so Taylor and I
gathered together and thought that arts
that black could be the place to do it
right
if we wanted to spark a conversation
about the implications from the lack of
published critical interpretations then
we had to use the resources that we had
available to us and we were digital
natives and so that resource was the
internet I like to think of arts top
black as something that embodies that a
core lineage of black writers and black
and black artists who are using the
collective as both a site of resistance
and shelter and I think especially of a
really profound quote from Toni Morrison
where she simply states that if there's
a story you want to tell and you don't
see it tell the story and so I think
that's two black women who wanted to see
something in the world we quite
literally realize that like we needed to
offer it ourselves so here's a
screenshot of the home page and I'll
just give you kind of quickly a
logistical overview we started out as a
tumblr which it's kind of the only thing
we knew how to do because we are not
coders we aren't developers and tumblr
was free and available in kind of
template simply did it for us we've
since migrated over to our real website
with working in partnership with an
amazing developer and designer gazmin
vera who's also in New York we published
two essays or interviews or reviews a
month and we also pay our writers we are
fiscally sponsored through creative mini
and was previously supported by the
islet media project based in Detroit
where Taylor lives and so our mandate is
to publish black identify critics
globally although we place no kind of
parameters on what those writers can
write about and in getting back to
intimacy I think what I want to argue is
that we can make space for rigor that
arises when critics can orient ourselves
horizontally to the artist
what does criticism look like when we
reject the myth that it can only
manifest itself in one way and often I
met with the counter-argument that I
think it's a sound counter argument does
intimacy or taking up the task of
intimacy lose
do you lose objectivity and it's that if
you lose objectivity can you consider
that to be criticism and I think I'm
arguing that I can still produce
rigorous responsive responsible
conversations about what is at stake in
the making process for an artist only
when I'm embedded deeply in looking
slowly at that process so one of the
more recent examples that I have been
thinking about in a conversation with
personally that I think may kind of fit
in to the themes in body by today's
gathering is the project distributed web
of care organized by the artist and
activist and educator taeeun Choi so DWC
is a research initiative initiative that
focuses on communication infrastructure
and a peer-to-peer alternative webs that
prioritize collective agency and
individual ownership of data and code so
I had the pleasure of participating in a
school show residency this summer
continued and invited me to kind of help
make this thing happen asking to you
again I don't actually understand what
I'm doing is a part of this so sure what
do I have to offer but the idea as I sat
with it further aim to kind of think
about an entanglement right of care with
different practices including the
practices of makers including artists
and community organizers and including
those of us who are trying to kind of
publicly articulate the text what it all
might mean the idea was to think about
how interdependence and stewardship
might allow us to collectively stand in
opposition to dominant networks and so I
guess the closer I got to my own
Skillshare workshop and the more that
I've been reflecting on it after it took
place a couple weeks ago is how it's
starting it was ultimately to be in
conversation as a writer in this room
because it forced me to think about how
my own work and the interpretations I
attempt to take on might point to larger
societal concerns this is to say that
I'm trying to figure out how to better
ask the questions what is at stake
for the artist and art that I attend to
and is art simply art for art's sake in
the Skillshare workshop I discussed the
role of trust between the writer and the
author artist and as a group using the
web alternative we kind of wrote letters
using artwork as an entry point to
discuss a thing that haunts us so one
writer took on the task of love and
talked about heartbreak and used a
particular work to kind of enter into
that conversation and then the letters
were then shared through the
peer-to-peer database here because I
figure out how to describe it for you
this is actually an example of how we
began that process in what it looks like
and we spent about three hours adding on
this doing this work with our individual
computers and the letters were then
accessed using the computers database
exclusively and bypassing kind of Gmail
or Google and those sorts of things and
so I wanted to close out with a few
words about a current project that I'm
using intimacy as a framework and
specifically shout out open space which
is SFMOMA digital platform yeah they do
really great work and I think is an
another important example of what it
might mean for digital platforms to take
up the task of art criticism and new
ways and so earlier this winter I was a
columnist and residents at open space
and began a project entitled drafts for
an epoch which used the work of several
black women artists to kind of begin to
meditate on and think about the 400
marker of blackness in this country
which is next year 2019 400 years after
1619 first encounter with black folks in
this land and so the project enabled me
on a monthly basis to take up the work
of artists such as Tiana Nokia Maclaurin
whose studio practice is largely looking
at
genealogies I'm in particular is focused
on the work of stubble black gay men who
have since passed and their fractured
archives I also got to look at a new
production by the surrealist playwright
Adrienne Kennedy and later close out the
residency with the work of sculpture
sculptor and writer Beverly Buchanan and
so I think for me and kind of taking the
totality of what digital public
publishing it's doing now it is quite
simply offering a certain type of inroad
for folks who may not necessarily have
immediate access to the networks of
publishing who may not necessarily be
able to take those unpaid internships
and who really want to be able to
contribute to new discourses around the
work that artists are producing and
we're largely kind of the implications
of that work and so I hope that what we
can continue to see recognizing that the
web might not ever be a neutral site but
that it may still be able to be
complicated in ways that can offer new
opportunities for folks who don't quite
always fit in or have access to the
immediate sort of resources that other
folks might have access to and so
[Applause]